Here’s my local PC
if I type ip config I can see my PCs IP address
and I can see the default gateway
my PC will send traffic to the default gateway
for any IP addresses not in the 192.168.56.0  subnet.
so as an example, if I ping google.com
that traffic is going via my default gateway
in the same way, I could telnet to a router.
here’s a Cisco router that I’ve got in my lab.
And if I type the command sh ip route
I can see the routing table of the router.
The router has directly connected networks.
So C is directly connected networks
as an example 192.168.56.0/24 is directly connected on this interface F0/0
so if I ping 192.168.56.1 that traffic is going to be sent out F0/0
because that network is directly connected to this interface.
Packets will traffic to 192.168.58.0 will be forwarded out of interface 0/1
notice this route S and * this is a candidate default route
in other words this static route is the default route that a router gonna use.
If I look at the running configuration of this router
and then include only lines that have IP router in them.
I can see this command was added to the router
so I type IP router 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 and then 192.168.56.1
This portion is saying that we are adding a default route
to the IP routing table of the router
with the gateway of last resort being 192.168.56.1
so basically this router will forward traffic to 192.168.56.1
for any networks not in it's routing table.
So once again sh ip route
shows me I have the 3 network 192.168.58, 192.68.56 192.168.97 in the routing table
but I don’t have as an example a route for google.com.
Google’s IP address is 216.58.213.100 that’s not in the routing table
but I was able to ping that address because of this entry in the routing table.
In other words, the local router forwarded traffic to 192.168.56.1
to firstly get to the DNS server 8.8.8.8
and secondly, to ping Google.com we can see that by using the traceroute command.
So let's trace route to Google.com
notice the first hop is 192.168.56.1 the local gateway of last resort
traffic is then sent out into the internet to get to google.com
so my traffic is being forwarded from router to router
until it gets to 216.58.213.100
this stars or * indicates that the router is not replying back
to the ICMP messages sent to it.
So ICMP maybe drop as an example
but the point to take note of is based on the IP routing table
on this router, the gateway of last resort or the default gateway is 192.168.56.1
this static route has been added to the routing table
and I could remove that by typing no ip route
Selecting the route so now when I type sh ip route
notice the static route that was their previously has now been removed
so now if try and ping  google.com
the DNS resolution is failing and we won't be able to ping google.com
because we can't resolve the DNS name to IP address of Google.com
in this case, it's re-using the cache entry
and is sending traffic to 216.58.213.100
but notice the pings fail, we had a 0 success rate.
If I add this static route back again
and type sh ip route static route is back
and now when we ping Google.com the ping succeeds.
So static routes are still used quite heavily
especially on routers at remotes site or small sites.
Here’s my router at home.
This is the 192.168.56.1 router
that’s my Cisco router had as it's default gateway
and this router will also have a default gateway connecting it to the Internet.
So I'll log in if I look at the broadband connection
notice my local router has this IP address
and the default gateway is set to the IP address, primary DNS and secondary DNS
are set to these values, so my home broadband router
or DSL router has its own default gateway.
This Cisco router is forwarding traffic to the BTDSL router using this static route
and the BT router is forwarding traffic to this default gateway.
Every router makes its own decision on where to forward traffic to
hence following the hop by hop paradigm.